The Project Gutenberg eBook, Primrose Hill Park, Regent's Park, and
Hampstead Heath, by William Ray Smee


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Primrose Hill Park, Regent's Park, and Hampstead Heath


Author: William Ray Smee



Release Date: May 16, 2020  [eBook #62152]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIMROSE HILL PARK, REGENT'S PARK,
AND HAMPSTEAD HEATH***


Transcribed from the 1873 Shaw and Sons edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                        [Picture: Pamphlet cover]

                          _PRIVATE CIRCULATION_.

                                * * * * *





                           PRIMROSE HILL PARK,
                              REGENT’S PARK,
                                   AND
                             HAMPSTEAD HEATH.


                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
               PRINTED BY SHAW AND SONS, FETTER LANE, E.C.
                                  1873.

                                * * * * *




PREFACE.


THE main object sought to be attained in this correspondence was to
induce the Government to purchase two plots of land adjoining Primrose
Hill Park, together about eighteen acres, that space may be given to a
great and rapidly-increasing population for football and cricket.  It is
probable most persons who know the wants of the district will be of
opinion that it is very desirable this should be done.  Every summer’s
evening there is, in the small space of ground now available in the
Regent’s Park, over-crowding and a badly made game.  Many who wish to
play cannot for want of room, and two fine boys, about fourteen years of
age, complained that they were frequently hit, and the balls crossed each
other so closely that they did not know their own ball.  But another
proposal was incidentally mentioned, upon which there cannot be the same
unanimity.  It is suggested that a road should be made from the top of
Portland Place for equestrians, carriages, and cabs through the Regent’s
Park, and then to some part of Hampstead Heath.  If any one considering
this question will stand at the top of Portland Place and imagine the
same carried on straight through the park, and then, as far as now can be
done, a park-like road made to the Heath, and reflect how charming and
healthy such a drive and ride must be, with the bracing air and beautiful
views on all sides, easy and pleasant of access, he, perhaps, may think
the scheme worthy of very careful investigation.

Those who are acquainted with Paris know the extraordinary change for the
better effected when a new and direct road was carried from the Arc de
L’Etoile to the Bois de Boulogne, and it is to be presumed that
improvements will, without loss of time, be made in Hampstead Heath, and,
as in the Bois de Boulogne, suitable rides and drives created.  The
natural advantages of the situation are in favour of London as compared
with Paris, and it is not too much to say, if proper use is made of them,
that, as a whole, Regent’s Park, Primrose Hill Park, and Hampstead Heath
will, for all the purposes that parks are formed, be unsurpassed in
Europe.

But to open the park at Portland Place may require an Act of Parliament,
and many may think the Regent’s Park is best as it is; nevertheless, the
extreme beauty of a road through the centre of the Regent’s Park, in
addition to being so much nearer, ought to be a consideration.  It will
shorten the drive to Primrose Hill going and returning, over the present
route, nearly a mile; but should this not be deemed sufficient reason for
the change, then it may be desirable to make a carriage bridge over the
canal instead of the present foot bridge at the end of the Broad Walk,
opening into the Albert Road at St. Mark’s Church and close by Primrose
Hill.

Should public opinion approve this scheme there is no reason to suppose
the Government will offer any opposition to it.

2, ST. EDMUND’S TERRACE,
               REGENT’S PARK NORTH,
                        25_th_ _June_, 1873.




LETTERS.


                                     The Right Hon. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.,
                                                                  &c., &c.

SIR,

Knowing the great and arduous duties you have to perform I regret being
obliged to call your attention to a very small affair, but the case is
urgent, and in a few months buildings will be placed upon a portion of
the ground.

Primrose Hill Park is very much used by boys as a cricket or foot-ball
ground, and on Saturdays there is not enough space.  Even to-day, with
the ground wet and weather not inviting, it was full, and in the summer
months boys go away because there is not room to play.

It may, therefore, be worthy of your consideration whether the Government
should not purchase the Eton and Middlesex Cricket Ground, which adjoins,
and consists of about twelve acres.  This is a private ground, and, I
believe, does not pay.  There is another plot of about six acres which
will be immediately built upon unless the Government at once secure it.

This would make a splendid addition to the park, and, perhaps, £20,000
would purchase the whole.

I have the honour to be, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient servant,
                                                         WILLIAM RAY SMEE.

Regent’s Park North,
         5_th_ _April_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

                                                   WILLIAM RAY SMEE, Esq.,

SIR,

Mr. Gladstone desires me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
6th instant.

I am, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                             J. A. GODLEY.

10, Downing Street, Whitehall,
                  8_th_ _April_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

                                         Right Hon. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.,
                                                                  &c., &c.

SIR,

I am obliged to trouble you again respecting the purchase by the
Government of about eighteen acres of land adjoining Primrose Hill Park,
for upon a portion of it the turf is now being rapidly taken away, and
the land is to be built upon unless something is at once decided.

There is a necessity for adding this ground to the Park.  The population
is rapidly increasing.  Every small open space is closed.  Boys and
youths who cannot afford to pay have no place for cricket except on
public property.  On Saturdays, the young of more than half a million of
people come to Primrose Hill, or would come if there were space.  This
afternoon there were between 2,000 and 3,000, and if the day had been
finer there would have been many more.

I showed to a gentleman well conversant with the district the ground I
thought ought to be purchased, and he assured me in five years’ time,
with the addition, space would be wanting, and strongly urged the
publication of the suggestion.  That, however, I am very unwilling to do
so long as there is a prospect of the Government acting in this business,
and I therefore venture respectfully to ask your decision.

Assume that the cost will be £20,000, it is only part of the interest on
that amount the Government can lose.  The State is equally rich whether
the property is in money or land.  The eighteen acres will make excellent
sheep land, and must yield something, and the strength and health given
to many thousand youths must speedily add to the national revenue far
more than the remainder.

The financial side of the question is really quite insignificant, but the
moral good done will be of the highest importance.

I have the honour to be, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                         WILLIAM RAY SMEE.

Regent’s Park North,
         26_th_ _April_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

Before this letter was answered the following was sent:—

Mr. WILLIAM RAY SMEE presents his respects to Mr. Gladstone, and, in
reference to his communication of Saturday, wishes to say, as showing the
importance of taking into consideration the rapid increase of population;
that some years ago, when there was a field walk, but little frequented
on weekdays, from Primrose Hill to Hampstead, he proposed to Lord
Palmerston to purchase sufficient ground and make a road from the top of
Portland Place, through Regent’s Park, and round Primrose Hill straight
to Hampstead Heath.

This road along its whole length was to have been Park-like, to be used
by carriages, cabs, and persons on horseback, would have added to the
beauty of the West of London, and if the Government had thought it
desirable, might have been made to repay its cost by the surplus land
between Primrose Hill and Hampstead that might have been sold for villas.

Such a road was much wanted, and private enterprise has already made
two-thirds of it, and placed houses on both sides.  Nevertheless it is
altogether different from what the State would have done.  It is neither
broad nor straight.  It does not add to, but takes from the beauty of the
neighbourhood.  In the meantime Hampstead Heath has become public
property, and the opportunity to make a direct approach thereto from
Regent Street in a way, which foreign visitors to London would have
greatly admired, is permanently lost.

Mr. Smee mentions this, as it may still be worthy of consideration,
whether Regent’s Park might not be opened at Portland Place, and whether
anything can now be accomplished in the unmade portion of the road
between Primrose Hill and Hampstead Heath.

                                  To the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.,
                                                                 &c., &c.,

Regent’s Park North,
         2_nd_ _May_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

On the 6th May the letter of the 26th April was acknowledged:—

                                                To WILLIAM RAY SMEE, ESQ.,

SIR,

Mr. Gladstone desires me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
2nd instant, on a matter which seems to belong to the province of the
Metropolitan Board of Works.

I am, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                             J. A. GODLEY.

10, Downing Street,
         8_th_ _May_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

                                         Right Hon. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.,

SIR,

I believe with this letter, I have done all that a gentleman in a private
station can with propriety do to urge upon the Government the purchase of
two plots of land, one of six acres and the other of twelve, adjoining
Primrose Hill, to be used by boys and youths for foot-ball and cricket.
In a very short time buildings will be commenced upon the smaller plot,
and the opportunity will be lost.

How much this ground is now wanted was apparent in the numbers playing
cricket this afternoon in the Regent’s Park.  In the portion allotted to
boys the wickets were placed in many cases only eight yards apart;
perhaps there were 1000 boys playing, and only those clubs were allowed
that previously had obtained permission.

The same applies to the ground for youths and men.  There were, perhaps,
800 playing; one set of wickets was close to another on all sides, and it
was marvellous the game could go on without serious accidents.  A
sergeant of police that happened to be passing told me it looked most
dangerous, and nothing would induce him to join; but a youth, who was
playing, said the accidents were very few,—although at first he was much
frightened, yet the danger was not so great as it appeared.

The purchase of the eighteen acres would relieve this ground, enable some
of the clubs to go to Primrose Hill, and cricket could be properly and
joyfully played, and space would be given for many who now very much wish
to play but cannot.

I have only to add, that should next Saturday afternoon prove fine, any
gentleman, about five o’clock in the afternoon, may ascertain how painful
to witness is the present over-crowded cricket ground of the Regent’s
Park.

I have the honour to be, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                         WILLIAM RAY SMEE.

Regent’s Park North,
            10_th_ _May_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

                                                   WILLIAM RAY SMEE, ESQ.,

Sir,

Mr. Gladstone desires me to inform you that your letter of the 10th inst.
should have been addressed to the First Commissioner of Works.

I am, Sir,

                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                             W. E. GURDON.

10, Downing Street,
         15_th_ _May_, 1873.

                                * * * * *

This closes the correspondence, and upon reflection it will be apparent
that a great nation can find no better and no more economical use for a
little mite of surplus revenue than its judicious employment in providing
space for healthy, innocent, and cheap out-door amusement.  The money so
spent on behalf of the population of this gigantic capital will double
itself over and over again.  It is the active and the healthy that make a
nation progress.  It is good sound sense, united with a vigorous frame,
that enables the man, advantageously to himself, to augment the receipts
of the British exchequer.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

               London: Printed by Shaw & Sons, Fetter Lane.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIMROSE HILL PARK, REGENT'S PARK,
AND HAMPSTEAD HEATH***


******* This file should be named 62152-0.txt or 62152-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/1/5/62152


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.